
Professor Gasper 
Oh Brother: On the Politics of Reproduction and Fratricide 
The Ottoman Empire is well-known for its longevity. For over 600 years, it was a major player on the world stage. Historians have differing opinions on what to attribute the long-lasting nature of the Ottoman Empire to. Some point to a diverse and multiethnic culture that absorbed factors from multiple outside civilizations in order to make their own unique society, others point to the rapid expansion of territory and use of new military technology. While the ‘cultural’ viewpoint is anachronistic, it has one valuable merit – it points to the adaptability of the Ottomans. According to historian Karen Barkey, the study of empires should be marked by their longevity and resilience.   When considering the Ottoman Empire, she points to a series of “segmented and changing structures” and draws attention to the “networked, vertical, and horizontal linkages… between…social actors.”  In other words, empires are built off hierarchical structures and sets of relations, or as Akhil Gupta and James Ferguson define, ‘the production of difference.’  In the Ottoman world, the practice of controlled reproduction and use of concubinage highlight these ‘difference-producing’ relations Gupta and Ferguson describe, and are a testament to the adaptability and longevity of the empire itself. 
The foundation of the Ottoman Empire can’t be attributed to a concrete date, but the circumstances behind its existence are known. The expansion of the Mongols in the early 11th century pushed many Turkic speaking tribes west, and into contact with what remained of the Byzantine Empire. At first the Turcomen were at a serious disadvantage, but this changed after the Seljuks defeated a Byzantine army in 1071. For the next 2 centuries, Turkic tribes battled for dominance in Anatolia, one of these being the Osmanoğlu, (the Ottoman son). First appearing on the Byzantine frontier, the emergence of Ottomans came at a key time. In 1261, the emperor of Byzantium moved the capital back to Constantinople, shifting the eye of the empire to Europe and away from Anatolia.  In 1301, Osman (the supposed founder of the Ottoman Empire) had defeated a Byzantine army east of Constantinople. Over the next half-century, he and his descendants took advantage of the Byzantines weakened state and had seized control of most of western Anatolia and even began to set up settlements across the Bosporus. To strengthen their fledgling emirate, the Ottomans adapted strategies from multiple local powers. To avoid the fate of the Seljuks, the Ottomans ‘moved to a system of’ unigeniture as opposed to primogeniture and adopted a key practice of their Byzantine counterparts – political marriage. 
	Marriage as an Ottoman political practice started with the union of Osman and a holy man’s daughter. ‘Osman’s Dream,’ as it is called, is the foundational myth of the Ottoman Empire. Osman visits Sheikh Edebali, and in his presence, has a dream about a tree sprouting from his chest and encompassing the entire world. Osman’s vision led to his marriage to Edebali’s daughter. This tale cements the beginning of the Ottoman Empire to a ‘semisacred marital union,’ and figured into its future success.  The Ottomans used marriage to further their political goals. One of the first was an arrangement to secure an alliance between themselves and the pretender to the Byzantine throne.  This union between Orhan and the daughter of John Cantacuzenus gave the Ottomans a key foothold in Gallipoli and allowed for the further expansion of their territory. As the emirate grew, so did the amount of political marriages. Throughout the 14th century, unions tended to be formed with Christian women, while in the 15th century they were arranged with Muslim women. This displays the growth of the Ottoman power. At first, they were creating political alliances with Christian powers in the Balkans, but by the 1400s, they began to expand east, subjugating other Turkic tribes through conquest and marriage. As the Ottoman’s emirate grew, the decision to marry daughters and sons of other powers became less and less beneficial. By introducing an external bloodline to the House of Osman, it increased the risk of outside claims to the throne. However, once the Ottoman Empire was powerful enough, the claim was that no one was worthy of a bond with the House of Osman. Murad II was the last of the Ottoman sultans to partake in an arranged marriage. From that point on, the Ottomans implemented the exclusive practice of concubinage. 
	Using concubinage to produce heirs is not unique to the Ottomans; the Abbasid dynasty used royal concubinage along with legal marriage for centuries.   It is yet another custom the Ottomans adopted. As opposed to producing offspring in a legal marriage, concubinage reduced the chance of there being a ‘heretical wife or mother’ that might corrupt the Sultan.  First and foremost, concubines were slaves, gained from either raids or conquest. Their background was inconsequential – their religious beliefs, previous history and appearance did not matter; the prerequisite was that they came from outside the House of Osman.  Once the concubines were a part of the imperial harem, what Leslie Peirce defines as the ‘politics of reproduction’ began. In the harem, sex was surrounded by rules that were embedded in the ‘complex politics of dynastic reproduction.’ Power was linked to sexual maturity, and this definition was different for men than it was for women. For men it was puberty – the ability to have children signified the beginning of their political maturity. However, there were strict rules – men could not grow facial hair or father children if they were part of the harem. For women, their power lay at the opposite end of the spectrum of reproduction – they gained political maturity at the cessation of child bearing. This includes the informal one mother one son policy adopted by the Ottoman Empire. If a concubine to the Sultan bore a son, she was to no longer have sex with the Sultan. Instead, her life was now dedicated to raising her son to be the next ruler of the Ottoman Empire. When the boy was old enough, the Sultan would appoint his son as the governor of an Ottoman province. Accompanied by his mother, the child would now begin to train to be the most qualified successor to the Sultanate. In some cases, the prince-mothers would be pseudo-governors for years, as their sons would be too young to make decisions on their own. 
	Since the Ottomans practiced unigeniture, this meant that one of the Sultan’s sons could succeed him. There was no sense of seniority – the eldest son has no greater claim than his youngest brother, all that mattered was merit. To determine the next Sultan, the princes took part in the unofficial (but later codified) practice of fratricide – the killing of one’s brothers. After Orhan and until Suleyman, each Sultan used fratricide to ascend to the Sultanate. Murad II blinded two of his brothers. Mehmed the Conqueror had his infant brother executed. Even Suleyman had his cousins hunted down and killed. Every brother was killed, along with their offspring – there was to be no challenge to the throne once the rightful Sultan had ascended to power. The princes unfortunate enough to lose the war of succession payed the ultimate price, but their mothers were not held to the same fate - the prince-mothers were granted honorable exile in Bursa. Upon their death, they were reunited with their sons for eternity, buried next to them in their tombs. The process of fratricide was used for its obvious upside, the lack of challenges to the Sultanate, but the negative effects were often debilitating to the Empire. An entire system of succession based on civil war and conflict was not one tooled for stability, but it did fit the mantle of a militaristic and expansionist state.  Following the reign of Suleyman, the process of succession underwent a drastic change. No longer did it consist of bloody wars and fratricide, but instead became centered on seniority; the Sultanate was to be passed to the eldest living male in the line of Osman.  Princes were not allowed to father children or to leave the palace and were not appointed to governorships by the Sultan. Instead, they lived their lives in the harem, ‘deprived of the identity’ they once had.  
	As Karen Barkey states, ‘boundaries separate, make categories and shape social action…[creating] the restrictions, symbols, practices and ways of identifying and separating.’  The differences that were established, be they informal or codified, made up an integral part of the politics of the harem and the process of succession. Men and women gained political power at different times while princes had to distinguish themselves from their brothers through merit. The boundaries that were established, the difference-producing relations that were implemented distinguished the Ottoman Empire from the powers of the time and contributed to the overall success and longevity of the House of Osman.
	
	
	

